Transition in an XFOIL solution is triggered by one of two ways:

  free  transition:  e^n criterion is met
 forced transition:  a trip or the trailing edge is encountered

The e^n method is always active, and free transition can occur
upstream of the trip.  The e^n method has the user-specified 
parameter "Ncrit", which is the log of the amplification factor
of the most-amplified frequency which triggers transition.
A suitable value of this parameter depends on the ambient
disturbance level in which the airfoil operates, and mimics
the effect of such disturbances on transition.  Below are typical 
values of Ncrit for various situations.

     situation             Ncrit
  -----------------        -----
  sailplane                12-14
  motorglider              11-13
  clean wind tunnel        10-12
  average wind tunnel        9     <=  standard "e^9 method"
  dirty wind tunnel         4-8

Note: The e^n method in XFOIL is actually the simplified envelope 
version, which is the same as the full e^n method only for flows 
with constant H(x). If H is not constant, the two methods differ
somewhat, but this difference is typically within the uncertainty
in choosing Ncrit.

The e^n method is only appropriate for predicting transition in 
situations where the growth of 2-D Tollmien-Schlichting waves via
linear instability is the dominant transition-initiating mechanism.  
Fortunately, this happens to be the case in a vast majority of airfoil 
applications.  Other possible mechanisms are:

* Crossflow instabilities. These occur on swept wings with significant  
  favorable chordwise pressure gradients.

* Attachment-line transition.  This requires large sweep, large LE
  radius, and a large Reynolds number.  Occurs primarily on big jets.

* Bypass transition.  This occurs in cases with sufficient wall
  roughness and/or large freestream turbulence or vibration levels.
  The linear-instability phase predicted by the e^n method is
  "bypassed", giving relatively early transition.  Usually occurs
  in favorable pressure gradients, while the linear-instability
  mechanism usually dominates in adverse pressure gradients.

If any of these alternative transition mechanisms are present, the
trips must be set to mimick their effect.  The bypass transition
mechanism can be mimicked to some extent by the e^n method by 
setting Ncrit to a small value --- Ncrit=1 or less.  This will 
cause transition just after linear instability begins.  For
very large freestream turbulence or roughness in favorable
pressure gradients, bypass transition can occur before the 
linear instability threshold, and in this case trips will have 
to be set as well.


Numerical accuracy
------------------

-- Panel density requirements --
If strong separation bubbles are present in a viscous solution, then 
it is very important to have good panel resolution in the region of the 
bubble(s).  The large gradients at a bubble tend to cause significant 
numerical errors even if a large number of panels is used. If a separation
bubble appears to be poorly resolved, it is a good idea to re-panel the 
airfoil with more points, and/or with points bunched around the bubble 
region.  The paneling is controlled from the PPAR menu. A good rule of 
thumb is that the shape parameter Hk just after transition in the bubble 
should not decrease by more than 1.0 per point.  Likewise, the surface 
velocity Ue/Vinf should not change by more than 0.05 per point past
transition, otherwise there may be significant numerical errors in the 
drag.  The point values can be observed by issuing SYMB from the VPLO menu.
Moderate chord Reynolds numbers (1-3 million, say) usually require the 
finest paneling, since the bubbles are still important, but very small. 
On many airfoils, especially those with small leading edge radii,
the development of the small bubble which forms just behind the 
leading edge can have a significant effect on CLmax.  For such cases,
the default paneling density at the bubble may not be adequate.
In all cases, inadequate bubble resolution results in a "ragged" 
or "scalloped" CL vs CD drag polar curve, so fortunately this is 
easy to spot.


Caveats
=======
The XFOIL code is not foolproof, and requires some level of aerodynamic
expertise and common sense on the part of the user.  Although the
inviscid analysis (OPERi), geometry design (GDES), and Full-Inverse
(MDES) routines are nearly invulnerable to failure, the Mixed-Inverse
(QDES) design routines and especially the viscous analysis (OPERv) 
routines will fail if a "reasonable" problem is not specified.  
Typical failure scenarios are:

 - Viscous Analysis  (OPERv)
     * Massive separation from excessive airfoil thickness,
         flap deflection, or angle of attack
     * Inherently unsteady flow (von Karman vortex street, etc.)
     * Poor resolution of leading edge pressure spike
     * Poor resolution of small viscous features
         (e.g. separation bubbles)
     * Reynolds number too low

 - Mixed-Inverse Surface Speed Design  (QDES)
     * Re-entrant airfoil shape (negative thickness)

A possible consequence of these occurences is an arithmetic fault 
causing program failure.  This is unlikely, but it does happen
occasionally. It is therefore a good idea to save any previous work 
before an ambitious calculation is attempted.


The following situations may give problems strictly due to numerical 
roundoff:

 - Excessively small panel(s) somewhere on the airfoil

 - Airfoil located too far from origin

 - Airfoil too thin

These situations will rarely result in an arithmatic failure, 
but will typically result in a "ragged" Cp distribution.
Examine the paneling in the GDES menu, making the GSET command 
if neceesary to set the current paneling.  Eliminate excessively
small panels my deleting one or more panel nodes with the
DELP command.


When performing viscous analysis calculations, it is always a good idea
to sequence runs so that alpha does not change too drastically from one
case to another.  The Newton solution method always uses the last
available solution as a starting guess for a new solution, and works
best if the change from the old to the new solutions is reasonably
small.  For this reason, it is best to perform difficult calculations
(such as past CLmax) by gradually increasing alpha.  The ASEQ command in
OPER is convenient for this.  If the user insists on a large change from
one point to another, it is best to force a re-initialization of the
boundary layers with the INIT command from the VPAR menu in OPER before
the radical calculation is performed.  INIT should always be executed
whenever the viscous solution blows up but the program doesn't crash.

The viscous analysis will execute no more Newton iterations than
set by the current iteration limit each time an ALFA, CL, etc. command 
is issued.  If convergence is not achieved within this limit, ALFA or CL 
can be issued as often as needed (most easily with "!"), with another 
set of Newton iterations being performed each time.  This iteration 
limit can be changed from its default value of 10 with the ITER command 
in OPER.

One should always be wary of trusting solutions which show regions
of supersonic flow.  Such flows can be reliably predicted only with 
a truly nonlinear field method (such as the MSES code).  As a rule
of thumb, if the maximum Mach number doesn't exceed 1.05 anywhere,
shock losses will be very small, the Cp distributions will be 
reasonably accurate, and the drag predicted by XFOIL is likely
to be accurate.
